The first type of user segmentation and one of the most common in
segmentation is the date at which a user began using a product.
Segmentation based on user acquisition date is also called cohort analysis.
A cohort is a group of people with a shared experience,
meaning they started using the same product around the same time.
This could be as broad as the group of users who
started using an app on any mobile device in
June or as specific as the users who
started using an app on an Apple device last Tuesday.
When segmenting users into cohorts,
you should consider the pace at which changes are made in your product.
For products where marketing channels and new features are introduced every few days,
a daily view might be a helpful comparison.
As the pace of change slows,
the cohort groups can widen to new users in a week,
month, or even a quarter.
You can use a cohort analysis to try to isolate
the effect of marketing modification on user behavior.
For example, if you look at users who visited a website for
the first time in June and see 30 percent of those visitors went on to make a purchase,
and compare the June cohort with the visitors in August and
find 50 percent of those visitors went on to make a purchase,
this is a sign that the website is getting better at converting visitors into customers.
The reason for this difference will require more investigation.
The change might be due to different marketing strategies or
changes made to the website to encourage purchases or both.
By noting the difference between the two cohorts,
product managers can measure the effect of cumulative changes over time.
You can see that since groups of users in a cohort share the same experience,
the difference in KPI's,
such as conversion rate across different cohorts may point to
a change that impacted user experience for better or worse.
As cohort analysis deal with groups over time,
the format for analyzing
a cohort analysis is a little different than other segment analysis.
Generally, a cohort analysis will list the cohorts as rows.
Take users visiting a website as an example.
In this chart, November 3rd, 2nd,
October 31st, on the left-hand side,
is the day a user first arrived on the website.
On the top, day with 0, 1, 2,
3 shows the number of days since the user was first seen.
The percentage shows the percent of users that took a desired action over time,
in our example, visiting the website.
On day 0, all users in their cohorts landed on the website.
The percentage of them taking the desired action of
visiting the website is 100 percent for all cohorts.
Of the 3,500 users who visited the site for the first time on November 3rd,
39 percent of them were seeing again two days after their first visit.
To better view the percentage drop off,
the chart is usually color-coded.
The darker the boxes,
the higher the percentage of users from the cohort that returned on the day in question.
The classic cohort analysis shows user retention or
the percent of users who complete a desired action on one day,
and on the next, and the next after that, and so forth.
By looking at this cohort analysis,
we can see if there are differences in retention rates among those of different cohorts.
If a difference is seen,
this may mean something about the users or the product has changed.
Cohort analysis can be used to examine metrics other than retention.
Here, we see an example of an e-commerce site that is tracking a user cohort by
day in order to see how many days it typically takes for a user to make a purchase.
By looking for the dark blue areas which indicate
a higher percent of users took the desired action of making a purchase,
we can see that most users make a purchase about 2-3 days from first visiting the site.
It also looks like the most recent cohorts,
those users who visited the site for the first time on October 14th and 15th,
have a higher purchase rates on day 0 and 1 than other cohorts.
Such data provides evidence to
a product manager that a change might have been made around
October 18th that had the positive result of more visitors making purchases sooner.